Introduction
Individual places that facilitate social convi-
viality are fundamental features of local
neighbourhoods. Neighbourhood places
provide material needs for residents and visi-
tors. The less tangible benefits of individual
places like parks, shops and cafes arise from
their ability to collectively enhance opportu-
nities for social interaction in a given neigh-
bourhood (Baum and Palmer, 2002; Patch,
2008; Zukin et al., 2009). Both the presence
and spatial arrangement of places in the
neighbourhood influence how opportunities
for social interaction emerge via their capa-
city to funnel population movement and con-
trol flows of people (Small and Adler, 2019).
Passive sociability can arise as a function of
routine daily activities when individuals
encounter one another as they move through
and use neighbourhood places. Particular
types of places within the neighbourhood
facilitate lingering and active social engage-
ment by design (Hillier and Hanson, 1984;
Mehta and Bosson, 2009). For example,
parks and street-front shops, commonly
patronised by local residents, can facilitate
repeated social interactions between neigh-
bours over time (Small and Adler, 2019;
Zukin et al., 2009). Alternatively, places like
industrial buildings, cemeteries and hospitals
can create social holes, and features such as
rail lines and highways can physically frag-
ment neighbourhoods, by restricting mobility
and hindering opportunities for people to
come together (Hipp et al., 2014; Wickes
et al., 2018). By influencing the potential for
social interaction, neighbourhood places can
indirectly affect neighbourhood cohesion and
capacity for informal social control, with
implications for collecive efficacy and crime
(Sampson et al., 1997).
Collective efficacy develops when social cohesion is coupled with informal social control (Sampson et al., 1997). It relies on a
sense of familiarity among individuals and
the perception of shared values and norms
(Sampson, 2012). Neighbourhood places
that facilitate social interaction provide
opportunities to build cohesive relationships
of trust, shared values and cooperation for
crime prevention (Kurtz et al., 1998;
Peterson et al., 2000). Herein, we refer to
such places as social conduits (Wickes et al.,
2018). Social conduits are places beyond
work and home that support both active
and passive human interaction (e.g. meeting
and talking with others; watching people
doing activities) (Wickes et al., 2018).
Neighbourhoods with a greater number of
social conduits present more opportunities
for social interaction, which may enhance
collective efficacy (Wickes et al., 2018). Yet
when social conduits are removed from the
neighbourhood or the spatial arrangement
of social conduits changes over time, this
may shift patterns of sociability, potentially
disrupting a sense of familiarity and the
shared values and norms that underpin col-
lective efficacy. In this case, residents lose
inclination to intervene when problems
occur because the individuals involved are
unfamiliar or they are unsure how other
members of the community will react to
their intervention (Sampson, 2013). This sit-
uation can lead to increases in crime oppor-
tunities (Sampson, 2006, 2012).
Crime opportunities emerge when moti-
vated offenders and suitable targets converge
at places where capable guardians are absent
or less inclined to intervene (Cohen and
Felson, 1979). Places visited by motivated
offenders to covertly engage in illegal activi-
ties are crime attractors (e.g. vacant lots and
industrial sites). Places where crime opportu-
nities emerge, as potential offenders and tar-
gets undertake legitimate activities, are
referred to as crime generators (Brantingham
and Brantingham, 1995). Under certain
social, demographic and economic condi-
tions, crime generators may be considered
social conduits given that both types of
places facilitate social interactions. While
social conduits facilitate prosocial interac-
tions, crime generators facilitate deviance
(Brantingham and Brantingham, 1995;
Wickes et al., 2018). When collective efficacy
is high and individuals undertaking legiti-
mate activities engage in surveillance, oppor-
tunities for crime are low (Cohen and
Felson, 1979; Jacobs, 1961). However,
changes in neighbourhood places that alter
patterns of regular social interaction and the
capacity of the neighbourhood to develop
and maintain collective efficacy may increase
crime vulnerability. As such, social conduits
may act as crime generators until patterns of
regular social interaction develop once more.
To date, scholarship on neighbourhood
change has focused primarily on the associa-
tion between changes in population compo-
sition and crime (see Kirk and Laub, 2010,
for an in-depth review of the neighbourhood
change and crime literature). Studies also
consider specific processes of neighbourhood
growth, decline and instability such as gen-
trification (Balzarini and Shlay, 2018;
Papachristos et al., 2011), mass foreclosures
(Ellen et al., 2013) and natural disasters
(Curtis et al., 2013; Zahnow et al., 2017).
Yet, for the most part, this research is lim-
ited to demographic and economic indica-
tors of neighbourhood status, or focuses on
the addition or removal of one particular
type of facility. Examples include case stud-
ies on increases in coffee shops (Papachristos
et al., 2011), on the temporary closure of a
train station (Phillips and Sandler, 2015) and
on stadia during periods of closure (non-
game days) (Kurland, 2019). This research
provides insight into how the changing pres-
ence of places can socially impact commu-
nities, but the generalisability of the findings
to other neighbourhoods is limited. Further, the studies do not capture the real-life incre-
mental shifts that occur within neighbour-
hoods as a collective context over time.
In this study, we classify neighbourhood
places based on expected patterns of legiti-
mate use and their capacity to facilitate
social interaction. We add to the current
scholarship by examining the association
between changes in the presence and spatial
arrangement of neighbourhood places and
(a) collective efficacy, and (b) crime.
Drawing on crime opportunity theories and
theories of neighbourhood social control, we
hypothesise that changes to neighbourhood
places will leave communities vulnerable to
crime until new patterns of natural surveil-
lance emerge and collective efficacy
develops.
Background
Places are inherently social. Without people,
places are denuded of meaning and are
merely space. In contrast to the fluidity of
social life, places are ‘bricks and mortar’ and
provide relative stability (Felder and
Pignolo, 2018). Places scaffold people’s daily
routines and provide the framework for
social interaction to occur. Places like shops,
cafes, schools and restaurants can enhance
neighbourhoods by facilitating social inter-
actions ranging from ephemeral encounters
to scheduled meetings (Baum and Palmer,
2002; Small and Adler, 2019; Wickes et al.,
2018). Social cohesion and shared beha-
vioural norms develop over time, through
interactions that occur at these socially con-
ducive places (Felder and Pignolo, 2018;
Massey, 1994; Oldenburg, 1989).
Collectively, we refer to places that facilitate
neighbourhood sociability as social conduits
(Corcoran et al., 2018; Wickes et al., 2018).
Social conduits are conceptually similar
to Oldenburg’s (1989) ‘third places’ in that
in addition to their primary function, they
can facilitate the convergence of individuals
required for social interaction (Anderson,
2011; Oldenburg, 1989; Wickes et al., 2018).
Social conduits vary greatly in features, form
and function and thus support different
types of social interactions (Wickes et al.,
2018). While some social conduits provide
essential amenities for local residents and
enhance capacity for neighbour-based
encounters, others attract individuals from
broader catchment areas and increase the
presence of visitors in the local area (Wickes
et al., 2018). Similarly, while certain places
facilitate specific scheduled activities, others
are multi-functional where patterns of visita-
tion are temporally and typologically dispa-
rate. Thus, different types of social conduits
can support interactions ranging from the
incidental to the organised and regular.
Variation in the type of interactions sup-
ported at particular places can have a flow-
on effect for the development of social cohe-
sion and collective efficacy (Baum and
Palmer, 2002; Sampson et al., 1997).
We categorise social conduits into four
broad groups based on their social interac-
tion potential. Anchoring conduits facilitate
repeated interactions between the same
group of individuals (e.g. schools, churches),
while local exposure conduits encourage
unscheduled, less frequent interactions
between local residents (e.g. local parks, cor-
ner shops). Scheduled conduits facilitate
scheduled activities with locals and visitors
(e.g. restaurants, cinemas, train stations),
and extra-local conduits are those that
attract both locals and visitors at all times
(e.g. shopping malls).1 While each type of
conduit is expected to have a distinct influ-
ence on social interaction at the micro level,
the combination and arrangement of social
conduits influence the social interaction
potential at the neighbourhood level. Thus,
the presence of social conduits indirectly
impacts social ties (Duncier, 1992; Furman,
1997; Oldenburg, 1989), collective efficacy
and crime (Hipp et al., 2014; Klinenberg,
2002) by providing physical opportunities
for individuals to come together to form
pro-social bonds and develop shared norms
of behaviour.
Previous studies have elucidated the
social benefits of particular neighbourhood
features (Baum and Palmer, 2002; Mehta
and Bosson, 2009; Whyte, 1980). In a study
of social cohesion in Dutch neighbourhoods,
van Bergeijk et al. (2008) found that resi-
dents who shopped daily in the local area,
visited cafes and restaurants at least once a
month and/or visited community centres
had larger social networks and expressed a
greater sense of social belonging than those
who did not use local facilities. Similarly,
Cabrera and Najarian (2015) found that
more frequent use of local shops and busi-
nesses (foci such as the yoga studio, fitness
centre, cafe) resulted in residents having
more bridging social ties (see also Vo ¨ lker
et al., 2007). Many of these studies focus on
the individual, proposing that as people go
about their daily activities at local places,
they inadvertently participate in neighbour-
hood social life and contribute to the actual
and perceived social cohesion (Granovetter,
1983). Interaction with others can also lead
to the development of collective values and
behavioural norms that can be activated
when community problems such as crime
and disorder arise, which is referred to as
collective efficacy (Granovetter, 1983;
Kleinhans and Bolt, 2014). The benefits of
neighbourhood social cohesion and its
extension, collective efficacy, for individuals
and at the neighbourhood level are widely
reported. Living in a collectively efficacious
neighbourhood is associated with better
health and wellbeing (Browning and
Cagney, 2002; Kawachi and Berkman,
2001), while collective efficacy at the neigh-
bourhood level predicts better childhood
outcomes, better disaster recovery (Kawachi
and Berkman, 2001; Paton, 2010) and,
importantly, reduced crime (Morenoff et al.,
2001; Sampson et al., 1997). Even at the
level of the individual street segment, higher
collective efficacy is associated with lower
crime (Weisburd et al., 2020).
While social conduits provide opportuni-
ties to develop and maintain collective effi-
cacy, other features threaten social cohesion
by physically fragmenting neighbourhoods.
Physical fragmentation describes a physical-
spatial phenomenon whereby highways and
rail lines create interstitial places that disrupt
the urban fabric. By acting as a physical bar-
rier to mobility and interaction, extensive
infrastructure can undermine the develop-
ment of social cohesion across the neigh-
bourhood as a whole and instead limit social
interactions to those sharing a common
‘fragment’ of the neighbourhood (Hipp
et al., 2014). However, Grannis (1998)
notes that smaller streets within neighbour-
hood fragments play a primary role in foster-
ing social relations – albeit in a racially and
spatially segregated pattern. Similarly,
Appleyard and Lintell (1972) found people
perceive ‘heavy streets’ to be associated with
strangers and to serve only as a corridor
between the local neighbourhood and exter-
nal areas. On the contrary, smaller residen-
tial streets were perceived as the basis of
‘lively, close-knit communities’ (Appleyard
and Lintell, 1972: 93). Hence, while it is evi-
dent that highways and rail lines physically
fragment neighbourhoods, it remains unclear
whether fragmentation has a positive or neg-
ative impact on social cohesion across the
neighbourhood as a whole.
Social conduits, collective efficacy and
crime longitudinally
Considering that social conduits enable
social interactions (Simmel, 1997 [1903];
Small and Adler, 2019) and facilitate the
development of social cohesion (van
Bergeijk et al., 2008), it is reasonable to
hypothesise that additions, removals or
changes in the arrangement of social con-
duits over time may destabilise social cohe-
sion and collective efficacy, with
implications for crime (Zukin et al., 2009).
For the most part, physical neighbourhood
change is slow and almost imperceptible at
the aggregate level. A local shop may close
down and be replaced by a new restaurant,
or a new fitness centre may appear in a pre-
viously undeveloped space. In isolation,
these changes may have little impact on the
social interaction potential at the neighbour-
hood level. However, we assert that the
combinatorial influence of these changes
and reconfigurations may significantly alter
the potential for sociability and norm
development.
Since the turn of the century, urban scho-
lars have problematised neighbourhood
change. Processes of urbanisation and
gentrification have been scrutinised and
lamented for displacing vulnerable residents
(Barton and Gruner, 2016; Freeman et al.,
2015), segregating cities (Freeman, 2009)
and depersonalising social interactions
(Simmel, 1997 [1903]; Wirth, 1938). Theories
of neighbourhood change, including inva-
sion/succession (Park et al., 1925) and neigh-
bourhood life-cycle models (Hoover and
Vernon, 1959), acknowledge the inevitability
of neighbourhood change but retain a nega-
tive framing of neighbourhood decline and
population turnover. Despite a longstanding
interest in the idea of neighbourhood change
and its implications for social interactions
and crime, empirical scholarship is largely
limited to studies assessing changes in the
socio-demographic composition of neigh-
bourhoods over time (Galster et al., 2007;
Kirk and Laub, 2010). Commonly, the
mechanisms proposed to explain the associa-
tion between population changes and crime
align with those described here, suggesting
that neighbourhood change destabilises reg-
ular patterns of interaction. When this
occurs, social cohesion and collective
efficacy are reduced, which lowers the risk
to offenders and increases the likelihood of
crime. Prior work provides partial support
for this argument. In a study of Chicago
neighbourhoods, Becker (2016, 2019) finds
that neighbourhood change disrupts collec-
tive efficacy, which contributes to higher
violence.
Other processes of neighbourhood
growth, decline and (in)stability, such as
gentrification, have received greater atten-
tion in recent years. While gentrification is
concerned with neighbourhood renewal, the
majority of studies focus on changes in
neighbourhood status using census indica-
tors such as housing value, field of employ-
ment or average income (Ohmer et al., 2018;
Teernstra and van Gent, 2012) and do not
assess the changes in the presence or
arrangement of neighbourhood places. Two
exceptions include a study examining the
impact of increased coffee shops on crime
over time in Chicago neighbourhoods
(Papachristos et al., 2011), and a study
exploring the influence of changes to the
retail landscape in two New York City
neighbourhoods on social interactions
(Zukin et al., 2009). These studies demon-
strate that the addition of social conduits
can facilitate lower crime (Papachristos
et al., 2011), provide opportunities for social
interaction (Zukin et al., 2009) and serve as
a symbol of neighbourhood improvement
(Macintyre et al., 2008). However, the
removal of long-term businesses or shops
may dislocate social bonds and interrupt
informal street activity associated with sur-
veillance (Macintyre et al., 2008; Zukin
et al., 2009). Evidence suggests that neigh-
bourhood change, either positive or nega-
tive, tends to be socially disorganising at
least in the short term (Kreager et al., 2011;
Papachristos et al., 2011).
The proposition that changes in the pres-
ence and arrangement of social conduits will
be socially disorganising at the neighbourhood level is supported by crime
opportunity theories and theories of neigh-
bourhood social control. From a crime
opportunities perspective, locales charac-
terised by low levels of informal guardian-
ship (Reynald, 2018) or those that do not
support natural surveillance by individuals
undertaking legitimate and routine activities,
provide more attractive crime opportunities
to offenders (Clarke, 1995; Wilcox et al.,
2007). Some types of places, referred to as
crime generators, are more susceptible to
crime because their primary function results
in the convergence of crowds, made up of
individuals who may be locals or visitors
(Brantingham and Brantingham, 1995).
While the label of crime generator incites
negative connotations, they are areas where
many people come together with legitimate
intentions, yet crowd density can create tem-
porary gaps in surveillance and reduced
capacity for intervention, producing oppor-
tunities for crime (Reynald, 2018).
Drawing on the tenets of social disorgani-
sation and collective efficacy theories, crimi-
nal behaviour is more likely to be monitored
and individuals are more likely to intervene
when social disorganisation is low and social
cohesion and mutual trust among residents
are high (Sampson, 2012; Sampson et al.,
1997; Shaw and McKay, 1942). Social cohe-
sion and mutual trust are developed through
repeated encounters at places over time
(Granovetter, 1983; Hipp, 2016; Sampson
et al., 1997). Associational social ties formed
through repeated interactions provide
opportunities for the transmission of beha-
vioural norms and the development of a col-
lective sense of familiarity that supports
willingness to intervene on behalf of the
common good (Gau, 2014; Granovetter,
1983; Kasarda and Janowitz, 1974;
Sampson, 2006). Subsequently, neighbour-
hoods undergoing change may be left vul-
nerable to crime while new patterns of social
interaction and natural surveillance emerge
and collective efficacy develops. Even in
places where collective efficacy is initially
high, this may be destabilised by changes to
the neighbourhood physical environment
that alter the patterns of regular social inter-
actions that form the basis of collective effi-
cacy (Hipp, 2016).
The current study
Previous studies have suggested that (a)
neighbourhood places provide settings for
pro-social and/or deviant interaction to
occur, and (b) neighbourhood change, when
measured demographically, can be disorga-
nising, at least in the short term. Our study
brings together crime opportunities and
neighbourhood social control theories to
examine the effect of changes in the presence
of neighbourhood places on collective effi-
cacy and crime. This research extends the
scholarship in three key ways. First, we
employ a longitudinal framework to capture
the relationship between changes in socially
conducive places and crime. Second, while
previous studies have been limited to exam-
ining the impact on crime of one type of
facility, such as bars (Jay, 2020; Roncek and
Maier, 1991; Wheeler, 2018) or parks
(Boessen and Hipp, 2018; McCord and
Houser, 2017), we simultaneously consider
multiple types of neighbourhood amenities.
This approach limits the potential for mea-
surement bias arising from the effect of
unmeasured neighbourhood features. Third,
our data encapsulate 147 neighbourhoods
that have experienced varying patterns of
growth, decline and stability over the period
of investigation. This is in comparison with
studies on neighbourhood physical change
that focus on single case study neighbour-
hoods (e.g. Zukin, 2009).
Data and methods
This study utilises three waves of the
Australian Community Capacity Study
(ACCS) conducted in 2008, 2010 and 2012
respectively. The ACCS is a longitudinal
survey of randomly selected residents from
148 Australian neighbourhoods (Wave 2
n = 4088; Wave 3 n = 4167; Wave 4
n = 4132).2 Survey participants respond to a
range of questions about their local commu-
nity, which they are informed refers to their
residential suburb. This is the unit of analysis
for this study and we refer to it throughout as
the neighbourhood. Neighbourhood popula-
tions in our sample range from 258 to 22,800,
while numbers of participants drawn from
each neighbourhood range from 11 to 47
(mean = 30)3 (see https://accs.pro ject.uq.e
du.au/).
Dependent variables. Collective efficacy: We
computed a scale comprising seven items
from the ACCS to capture respondents’ per-
ceptions of collective efficacy. The scale
comprises items that are identical to those
used in the Project on Human Development
in Chicago Neighborhoods in the original
study of collective efficacy (Sampson et al.,
1997). The dependent variable for Model 1
is the latent neighbourhood-level scale score.
Crime: Crime data for this study consist of
counts of property theft and public nuisance
offences recorded by the Queensland Police
Service from 2008 to 2012. We focus on theft
and nuisance as these are crimes of opportu-
nity that take place when informal social
control is absent or weak. Further, as we are
examining the impact of changes in the pres-
ence of social conduit types across a variety
of neighbourhood contexts, we wanted to
ensure that the examined crime types were
possible regardless of primary land use. For
example, it is not possible for burglary to
occur at the park. Our selection of crime
types was also based on data availability;
both theft and nuisance occur with adequate
frequency across our sample of neighbour-
hoods during each period to model crime
across all three time points.
Neighbourhood social conduits. We use the
Digital Cadastral Database (DCDB) and the
Queensland Valuation and Sales (QVAS)
land use data to categorise land parcels into
four types, based on their capacity to gener-
ate interaction and opportunities for social
control (Corcoran et al., 2018; Wickes et al.,
2018). The variable for each category is the
total number of places log transformed to
address the potential for outliers.
Type 1 – Anchoring conduits encourage
repeated interactions between the same indi-
viduals. This type includes schools, public
libraries, childcare centres, gyms/health
clubs and churches/religious facilities.
Type 2 – Local exposure conduits are places
that support encounters with other frequent
users at sporadic and unscheduled points in
time. These facilities are not the sites of
scheduled activities; rather, they are sites
with localised catchments that may encour-
age acquaintanceship ties between regular
users. This type includes neighbourhood
parks and single or row street-front shops.
Type 3 – Scheduled conduits facilitate sched-
uled activities with a variety of local and
extra-local users. These facilities can be busy
places at particular times and are associated
with particular functions including local res-
taurants, cinemas, theatres and train stations.
Type 4 – Extra-local exposure conduits are
places that attract a variety of local and
extra-local users. These features have large
catchment areas and facilitate incidental
encounters between diverse groups of people,
such as large malls or shopping complexes.
In addition to social conduits, we include
two other land use classifications that may
be important for barriers for neighbourhood
social interaction potential:
Social holes are places that are not openly
accessible to the public or are open to the
public but do not encourage social interaction. The features included in this
type are cemeteries, defence force bases,
industrial buildings and large hospitals.
Undeveloped parcels includes vacant house
blocks, bushland or state controlled national
parks but excludes neighbourhood parks
belonging to the local exposure conduit type.
These are empty spaces that do not contain
any amenities that would encourage social
interaction.
Physical fragmentation: In addition to the
presence of places that facilitate social inter-
action, the physical arrangement of neigh-
bourhood land use types may also influence
the likelihood of social encounters. This
physical arrangement is captured as an index
revealing the degree to which residential and
social spaces within the neighbourhood are
fragmented by highways, rail lines and
waterways. The fragmentation index mea-
sures the probability that two randomly
selected points in the neighbourhood will be
located in a single fragment, thus a greater
number of fragments reduces this probabil-
ity. Lower values indicate fewer neighbour-
hood fragments while higher values indicate
more neighbourhood fragments.
Neighbourhood social and demographic
characteristics. Neighbourhood social-demo-
graphic characteristics were drawn from the
Australian Bureau of Statistics’ census of
population and housing for the time points
2006 (Wave 2) and 2011 (Wave 4). Standard
linear interpolation was performed with
three time points (2001, 2006 and 2011) to
provide data for Wave 3. Variable selection
was informed by the theoretical and empirical
scholarship, highlighting key determinants of
social disorganisation and neighbourhood
crime; economic disadvantage; ethnic diversity;
residential mobility; and population density
(Sampson et al., 1997; Shaw and McKay,
1942). Economic disadvantage is the percentage
of neighbourhood households that earn less
than AU$799 per week. Residential mobility is
the percentage of households reporting a dif-
ferent address five years prior. To account for
ethnic diversity, we include a measure of lan-
guage diversity using a Blau index of the nine
main language categories reported in the
Australian census (Blau, 1977). We also
include a measure of population density.
Summary statistics for all variables are pre-
sented in Table 1.
Analytic approach. We adopt a mixed effects
modelling approach to examine the associa-
tion between change in neighbourhood social
conduits, collective efficacy and crime over
time. Mixed effects panel models are appro-
priate as they provide capacity to allow the
intercept and slope to vary across neighbour-
hoods in the sample, allowing the models to
capture both between-neighbourhood and
within-neighbourhood effects (Allison and
Waterman, 2002). The model estimates are
for panel models for i = 1.., N where N is
the number of neighbourhoods (147) and
t = 1,.T where T = 3 corresponding to
the three ACCS survey waves. We employ a
linear regression panel estimator to model col-
lective efficacy, given that this variable reflects
a normal distribution (see Appendix 1). The
basic form of the model is as follows:
yit = a + bXit + vit + eit
where yit is collective efficacy for neighbour-
hood i at time t. vit is the neighbourhood
specific error term and eit is the ‘usual’ error
term (StataCorp, 2015). We used a random-
effects estimator which produces a matrix-
weighted average of between and within
results (Allison, 2009). We use negative
binomial regression – a form of Poisson
regression that accounts for overdispersion
in the dependent variable – for estimating
counts of theft and nuisance offences. We
include total neighbourhood population as
the exposure term that constrains the associ-
ated coefficient to one (Hausman et al.,
1984; StataCorp, 2015).
The coefficients (Model 1) and incidence
rate ratios (IRR) (Models 2 and 3) include
both the within-neighbourhood and
between-neighbourhood effects. In the case
of our models, coefficients and IRRs repre-
sent the average effect of the independent
variable over collective efficacy and crime
when the independent variable changes
across time and between neighbourhoods by
one unit. Tests for multicollinearity revealed
all variance inflation factors (VIFs) were
below two and correlations were not proble-
matic.4 All analyses were conducted in Stata
14.0 (StataCorp, 2015).
Preliminary analysis: Visual depiction of
change in the study site (Brisbane)
Brisbane, our case study context (Figure 1a),
is one of the fastest growing cities in
Australia, with the census noting a 9.9%
increase in population between 2011 and
2016. This population growth, and related
residential and commercial development,
has been unevenly distributed across the
city. Figure 1a displays the spatial distribu-
tion of Brisbane’s population growth, high-
lighting that while many pockets of Brisbane
experienced rapid population growth from
2011 to 2016, some neighbourhoods (73 in
total) actually experienced a decline in popu-
lation. Consummate with population
changes, places within neighbourhoods also
changed over the study period. Figure 1b
reveals the spatial distribution of neighbour-
hoods where social conduits, social holes
and physical fragmentation increased,
decreased or remained stable over the five-
year observation period. While illustrating
that all neighbourhoods within Brisbane experienced some type of physical change,
this change was not consistent either within
or between neighbourhoods, nor across the
types of neighbourhood places. Rather,
Brisbane neighbourhoods were subject to
unique combinations of gains and losses in
social conduits, social holes and changes in
fragmentation. In the following analyses, we
employ panel regression models with ran-
dom effects to best capture the effect of both
within-neighbourhood change in conduits
and between-neighbourhood variations in
conduits on crime.
Figure 1. a) The case study context (Brisbane Statistical Division) and population change (count) by
neighbourhood between Wave 2 (2008/2009) and Wave 4 (2012/2013); b) Changes in neighbourhood
social spaces between Wave 2 (2008/2009) and Wave 4 (2012/2013) across the case study context
(Brisbane Statistical Division).
Results
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for
each of the variables of interest. Model
results are presented in Table 2.
Model 1 reveals that decreases in social
holes (B= - 0.025, p \ 0.01) and unde-
veloped land over time (B= - 0.043, p \
0.001) are associated with higher collective
efficacy, as is increased physical fragmenta-
tion (B = 0.103, p \ 0.05). Over time,
reductions in diversity (B= - 666, p \
0.001) and increases in residential mobility
(B = 0.004, p \ 0.001) are also associated
with higher collective efficacy. Given that
many neighbourhoods have grown and
developed in Brisbane, the relationship
between the percentage of new residents in
the neighbourhood and enhanced collective
efficacy is in line with what we would expect,
as this growth likely signals prosperity and
neighbourhood enhancement. There is no
significant association between social con-
duits and collective efficacy over time.
In relation to property theft, Model 2
reveals that lower collective efficacy is
associated with higher theft over time (B=
- 0.351, p \ 0.001). The model also
shows that increases in scheduled social con-
duits (cinemas, restaurants, train stations)
(B = 0.075, p \ 0.01), social holes (B=
0.047, p \ 0.01) and fragmentation (B=
0.239, p \ 0.01) are associated with more
theft over time. After controlling for collec-
tive efficacy, higher disadvantage (B=0.015,
p\0.001), diversity (B = 1.311, p \ 0.001),
mobility (B=- 0.009, p \ 0.01) and density
(B = 0.017, p \ 0.001) are associated with
higher recorded theft over time, as we would
expect from previous social disorganisation
research. There is no significant association
between anchoring, local exposure or extra-
local exposure conduits and theft over time.
Model 3 shows that nuisance displays
similar results to the theft model. The results
suggest that reductions in collective efficacy
are associated with higher recorded offences
(B=- 0.351, p \ 0.01). Increases in sched-
uled social conduits (cinemas, restaurants,
train stations) (B = 0.092, p\0.05),
undeveloped land (B = 0.057, p \ 0.05)
and disadvantage (B = 0.027, p \ 0.001)
also indicate higher nuisance over time.
There is no significant association between
anchoring, local exposure or extra-local
exposure conduits and nuisance crimes over
time.
Discussion
Neighbourhoods play a central role in peo-
ple’s daily lives. Places within neighbour-
hoods provide a range of services and
amenities. They also generate social interac-
tion potential by bringing individuals
together during their daily routines.
Some neighbourhood places such as social
conduits facilitate pro-social interactions,
and consequently support the development
of social cohesion and the transmission of
behavioural norms (Cattell et al., 2008).
Neighbourhoods with a greater number of
social conduits have higher interaction
potential that may support the development
of collective efficacy. The current study
explored how changes in the presence and
arrangement of social conduits, social holes
and physical fragmentation are associated
with collective efficacy, theft and nuisance
crime over time. We classified places that
facilitate passive or active human interaction
as social conduits, and features that discou-
rage social conviviality as social holes and
physical fragmentation. We hypothesised
that changes in the presence or arrangement
of social conduits and holes within neigh-
bourhoods over time would incur
neighbourhood-level changes in (a) collec-
tive efficacy, and (b) theft and nuisance
crimes. Drawing on crime opportunities and
neighbourhood social control theories, we
hypothesised that, as a result of shifting pat-
terns of interaction that enable the develop-
ment of familiarity, shared values and
norms, changes in the physical environment would disrupt collective efficacy and provide
opportunities for crime, at least in the short
term (Anderson, 1990; Kreager et al., 2011;
Stucky and Ottensmann, 2009). Our findings
partially support this hypothesis, although
some results were unexpected.
First, social conduits were not associated
with collective efficacy over time. Rather,
fewer social holes and less undeveloped land
in neighbourhoods over time may be benefi-
cial for collective efficacy. Social holes com-
prise land uses that detract from the social
fabric by discouraging thoroughfare and
therefore limiting opportunities for social
interactions (Hipp et al., 2014). Similarly,
undeveloped land and vacant properties pro-
vide limited social interaction potential. A
reduction in these types of places over the
time period considered, along with increases
in physical fragmentation and residential
mobility, indicate conditions associated with
the process of gentrification and/or land use
conversion (Barton and Gruner, 2016;
Papachristos et al., 2011). Similar to prior
research on gentrification, our results sug-
gest that when neighbourhoods undergo
physical development characteristic of this
process, it can support the growth of collec-
tive efficacy and reduced crime over time
(Papachristos et al., 2011; Steinmetz-Wood
et al., 2017; Zukin et al., 2009). While the
benefits of gentrification and neighbourhood
physical upgrade have been noted in previ-
ous studies, scholars have also highlighted
that the process by which existing neigh-
bourhood places are replaced by amenities
that cater to the in-coming middle-class
populace can exclude long-term residents
(Barton and Gruner, 2016) and in particular
racial minority groups (Hyra, 2017). While
our results suggest that neighbourhood
physical development may be associated
with greater collective efficacy over time,
this is not necessarily at odds with the sug-
gestion that particular individuals or groups
in the community are socially and physically
displaced by such development (Atkinson,
2004; Barton and Gruner, 2016). For exam-
ple, removal of social holes, including indus-
trial establishments and factories, may
provide social benefits for incoming resi-
dents while at the same time equating to
employment loss for some long-time resi-
dents by forcing them to relocate.
Model 2 predicting theft and Model 3 pre-
dicting nuisance crimes across time both
demonstrated some support for our hypoth-
esis that changes in collective efficacy and
requisite changes in the presence and
arrangement of social conduits, social holes,
undeveloped land and physical fragmenta-
tion have implications for crime. Results
show that within-neighbourhood increases
in scheduled conduits (type 3 conduits) and
social holes / undeveloped land, along with
decreases in collective efficacy, are associated
with higher theft and nuisance crimes. Taken
together, model results predicting collective
efficacy (Model 1), theft (Model 2) and nui-
sance crimes (Model 3) can be interpreted to
suggest that within-neighbourhood change
in social holes influences collective efficacy
(Model 1) and in turn crime (Models 2 and
3). Yet the addition of scheduled conduits
(type 3 social conduits) is not associated with
collective efficacy (Model 1), suggesting that
scheduled conduits influence crime directly
by creating opportune settings for theft and
nuisance (Models 2 and 3). Scheduled con-
duits align most directly with typical crime
generators (Brantingham and Brantingham,
1995) in that they act to bring people
together for legitimate purposes, but, due to
their tendency to (a) attract local and extra-
local visitors, and (b) generate crowds, they
can facilitate temporally bounded gaps in
surveillance and ephemeral dilution of loca-
lised familiarity at places. Such situations
discourage active guardianship and create
crime opportunities that can be exploited by
would-be offenders (Reynald, 2014; Reynald
and Elffers, 2009). Thus, an increase in these types of places is associated with more crime
but not necessarily weaker collective efficacy
at the neighbourhood level.
A limitation of many studies examining
the impact of neighbourhood places on
crime is that they lack data to capture loca-
lised social processes over time. So, while
existing scholarship provides rich theoretical
propositions regarding the potential
mechanisms through which neighbourhood
places exert an influence on crime, empirical
assessments that unpack the process over
time are limited. As our models do not
establish temporal ordering, we do not fully
address this issue here. Nonetheless, our
findings do highlight that some neighbour-
hood places impact both collective efficacy
and crime over time while others only
impact crime. This suggests that features
contributing to collective efficacy, and collec-
tive efficacy itself, may be unevenly distribu-
ted within individual neighbourhoods. This
aligns with Weisburd and colleagues’ (2020)
findings evidencing the relevance of collective
efficacy at the level of the street segment for
crime, and supports the need to further con-
sider the role of micro-places in the develop-
ment and maintenance of social processes
that facilitate informal social control.
As our study focused on the neighbour-
hood as the unit of analysis, we were not
able to establish the extent to which within-
neighbourhood shifts in social conduits or
social holes may displace crime and/or pro-
social opportunities to other areas within the
same neighbourhood or the requisite impacts
of such shifts on collective efficacy in smaller
spatial units. To capture this phenomenon
requires the computation of additional
metrics such as the Moran’s I (Moran, 1950)
to measure the spatial arrangement of social
conduits. While our measure of spatial
arrangement captures the level of fragmenta-
tion of all places in the neighbourhood, it
does not provide insight into the spatial clus-
tering of types of social conduits specifically.
Using Moran’s I, one could measure the
extent to which social conduits or social
holes were positively or negatively spatially
auto-correlated. In doing so it would be pos-
sible to characterise the extent to which
neighbourhood places tended towards a spa-
tially clustered arrangement versus one that
was more spatially dispersed. This offers an
interesting avenue for future research on the
micro-spatial arrangements of social con-
duits and social holes and their role in shap-
ing collective efficacy and crime.
Limitations
We note several limitations of the current
study. First, our data span a relatively short
time period (five years), which means we are
limited to observing relatively short-term
physical changes and their implications on
crime. A longer observation period would
also provide capacity to establish temporal
ordering through the utilisation of temporal
lags within the panel model structure.
Second, we looked at theft and nuisance
because they can be opportunistic and theo-
retically these types of offences are parsimo-
nious with the crime opportunities and
neighbourhood social control framework we
propose. However, this limits the capacity of
our study findings to be applied to violent
crimes or household burglary, which may be
differentially influenced by physical features
of the neighbourhood.
Conclusion
At the turn of the 20th century, urban scho-
lars cautioned that urbanism led to weak
social bonds (Wirth, 1938) and social aliena-
tion (Simmel, 1997 [1903]). Although subse-
quent research has found evidence that
contradicts such claims, contemporary scho-
larship converges with early urban sociolo-
gists on two important points: that the
physical environment in which people live has a real and measurable impact on their
lives, and that the effects are mediated by
neighbourhood social control (Massey,
1996). With over half of the world’s popula-
tion already residing in urban areas (United
Nations, 2018), it is of critical importance
that we develop the requisite understanding
through which we can direct the (re)design
and best support the development of safe,
socially inclusive neighbourhoods essential
for the wellbeing of our populations.
This study goes beyond the existing litera-
ture by examining the association between
neighbourhood places, collective efficacy and
crime longitudinally. An important point of
difference between this study and previous
research is our classification of neighbour-
hood places into types of social conduits and
social holes based on their potential social
interaction patterns. By doing this, our
results were able to demonstrate a need to
consider the implications of various neigh-
bourhood features differently. Currently,
zoning and land use regulations tend to con-
sider broad categories of land use such as
residential, commercial and retail. Yet the
findings of our study suggest that street-front
retail should be considered differently from
restaurant facilities, which are often classified
under the same zoning category.
Reconfiguring the built environment is no
easy task. It requires sustained financial
investment and a comprehensive and coordi-
nated approach that targets both policy and
practice. There are many actors that influ-
ence urban processes, across various profes-
sions and institutions, each responsible for
policies, plans or projects playing roles in
multiple aspects of the built environment. If
we intend to increment our urban environ-
ments towards becoming more socially sus-
tainable and socially efficacious places where
communities can thrive, then this task begins
by developing both an evidence base and an understanding of how the presence and
arrangement of places within neighbourhood
settings can be purposefully used to increase
the rate of pro-social encounters while redu-
cing the rate of anti-social encounters.
